---
title: "Tutorial 2 - Building and booting a custom Linux kernel for ARM using kw"
date: 2026-03-07 19:12:03 -0300
categories: [Kernel, Tutoriais]
tags: [linux, arm64, kw, kworkflow, kernel, cross-compile]
---

This tutorial is the natural continuation of tutorial 1.
It is at this time that I would like to introduce the course structure in the name of chesion.

The Free Software Development (FSD) subject, in 2026, is offered weekly as a 4-hour time frame every wednesday.
Me and my group opted to advance in the tutorials majorly in these encounters, as the teahcer and TAs often helped with the many issues we encountered.

Infos aside, let's get to the fun part, shall we?

## Introduction
The idea for this tutorial is to compile our first Linux kernel from its source code and succesfully boot it in the VM with the help of kw (k workflow).
What is that? You don't know what kw is? Well I am glad you asked!

## KW: FSD's Most Valuable Player
Full disclosure: as much as I had interested in the topic, I didn't really know much about kernel development prior to this subject.
Therefore, I was honestly quite intimidated by the first few classes seeing the apparent complexity of the commands ran.
Having said that, you can probably imagine the relief I felt coming across KW, formally presented in this very tutorial.

Putting it simply, [kworkflow](https://kworkflow.org/) (kernel workflow) is a tool deveoped with the sheer purpose of reducing the overhead of developing for Linux.
And that it does perfectly, as will be hopefully noticeable in the posts to come.

## Tutorial 2
Enough blabbering, can we get to the [tutorial](https://flusp.ime.usp.br/kernel/build-linux-for-arm-kw/) already? I hear you. Here we go!

Credit to KW or to a less complex topic, this one actually was a lot more straight forward than the first one.

The covered topics were:
* kw installation (!!)
* Kernel's IIO tree cloning
* General introduction to kw's inner workings

The topic of notice here is the `.config` file generated by `localmodconfig`. 
In the name of a shorter compiling time, it uses the currently active modules list (`vm_mod_list`) to generate a much shorter `.config` file.
The derived performance boost is anything but negligible.

Surprisingly enough, this tutorial posed no issues. Ironic given this post's initial disclaimer, I know.

By this point, we had a running VM with an IIO compiled kernel and a first taste of kw's magic.
